title = "What Goes Up, Must Come Down…Stream"
date = "2023-07-09T16:31:11.972817Z"
template = "blog"
tags = []
description = "How Pollution in East Palestine, Ohio Could Affect Gators in the Bayou and Drinking Water in Parts of the South"

[extra]
author = "Brandon Bowman"
type = "post"
twitter_card_type = "summary_large_image" 
images = ""

---

<!-- Ideally, for SEO there should be an image after the first paragraph or two -->

The earth is currently experiencing rapid ecological damage and deterioration as a direct result of the actions of its human inhabitants. Since the dawn of humans, the planet has been at their mercy and has suffered the consequences of human greed, industrialization, and urbanization. Throughout history there have been many environmental disasters, often as a result of corporate ignorance and greed, that are monumental and represent a turning point in the global mindset surrounding climate change and environmental awareness. On February 3 of 2023, the country observed an historic ecological and public health crisis unfold in East Palestine, Ohio. In this small town located near the Ohio-Pennsylvania state line, a train derailment left the area with water and air pollution that is destined to cause devastation for years to come. However, many people do not realize that this event has a much greater impact that extends beyond the geographic/political boundaries of this quaint, rural town. 

The impacts of events that appear far-removed from us based on physical distance are often connected to us because we all live upstream and downstream. This is the basic tenet of the watershed concept. Looking at problems of water quality requires one to look beyond “my lake” or “my stream” and recognize that we cannot solve water quality problems without looking outward to what is occurring on the land. Generally, water quality is a multifaceted, ongoing issue that must be approached by addressing the quality of all water and land resources in a certain area, also known as a watershed. In other words, the term watershed refers to an area of land that drains to a similar waterbody. The watershed concept is a very useful tool in analyzing the possible cascading effects of aquatic disasters, however, it is often neglected or disregarded in emphasizing the severity of ecological catastrophes, particularly those involving water resources. Due to the unidirectional flow of water in rivers and streams, the interconnectedness of waterways, and the continued decay of natural environments around the world, many of these disasters can reach areas far beyond their initial location. This often adds nuance and difficulty to solving water quality concerns. What is the point in discussing the concept of watersheds? Well, the location of the East Palestine train derailment raises a number of concerns regarding its location in the Ohio River Basin as well as the greater Mississippi River Basin which can lead to observed effects as far South as the Gulf of Mexico!   

So, what exactly occurred on that fateful evening in East Palestine, Ohio? According to ABC News, the event seemed to have unfolded around 8:54 p.m. EST where “About 50 cars of a freight train operated by Norfolk Southern derailed in a fiery crash on the outskirts of East Palestine.” (Deliso 2023) These train cars were carrying a variety of hazardous materials, including butyl acrylate, ethylhexyl acrylate, ethylene glycol monobutyl ether, and the most infamous of the bunch, vinyl chloride (Fortin 2023). Many of these chemicals are known as skin and respiratory irritants, however, the large amounts of vinyl chloride have garnered the most attention due to its existence as a known cancer-causing agent or carcinogen. It was estimated that around 1.1 million pounds of this compound were released into the environment as a result of the train derailment. This poses the question: what is vinyl chloride? According to the National Cancer Institute, it is a colorless gas that is easily flammable and has many adverse health effects associated with it. Vinyl chloride also does not occur naturally; therefore, it must be mass produced in industrial settings for a few commercial purposes, including the manufacturing of PVC or polyvinyl chloride, which is a durable plastic that can be used in pipes, wire and cable coatings, and materials for packaging. (National Institute of Health 2022) 
	
Exposure to vinyl chloride occurs mainly in two manners: through exposure and inhalation after production in an industrial facility, or through inhalation of tobacco smoke. Additionally, this carcinogen can enter one’s home through contaminated water supplies when those who reside within the home use the water for hygienic purposes, cooking, or any other reason. (National Institute of Health 2022) Vinyl chloride is an extremely dangerous chemical as chronic exposure can lead to nervous system damage, immune system impairment, and decreased bone strength in a person’s fingers, arms, and other joints. (Wisconsin Department of Health Services 2022) Additionally, as mentioned previously, vinyl chloride is a known carcinogen and is associated with higher risks for developing various liver cancers along with brain and lung cancers, leukemia, and lymphoma. (National Institute of Health 2022) Overall, vinyl chloride is a very toxic chemical that poses many threats to human and animal health. 

Now that enough time has passed since the inception of this disastrous act, the citizens of East Palestine, Ohio have witnessed the immediate impacts of exposure to copious amounts of vinyl chloride and the other toxic chemicals. However, it is important to expand the conversation beyond this area and to look at the long-term implications of an ecological and public health catastrophe of this magnitude. According to the Ohio Department of Natural Resources (ODNR), approximately 7.5 miles of waterways were impacted by the chemical spill. Of the affected waterways, “The final sample count of aquatic species (individuals representing these species) killed in waterways impacted in the area totaled 2,938. Of this collected sample, most - nearly 2,200 (species) - were small minnows.” Using this sample as well as a calculation provided by the American Fisheries Society, ODNR was able to estimate that the total number of minnows that were killed as a result of the train derailment was approximately 38,222. Additionally, they were able to estimate that around 5,500 other macroinvertebrates, small fish, crayfish, and amphibians were killed. Fortunately, ODNR did not observe significant wildlife deaths outside of the immediate area. (Ohio Emergency Management Agency 2023) However, this raises many concerns surrounding water quality, public health, and the region’s ecology due to its location in the Ohio River and Mississippi River basins as well as the understated influences of the cycling nature of water. 

The Norfolk Southern train wreck of East Palestine, Ohio has now become one of the most infamous events of the year 2023 and has garnered national recognition despite its localized impacts. As we have noticed the immediate and local effects of this catastrophe, the question remains: what are the long-term ramifications of the Norfolk Southern train wreck and how does it influence the nation as a whole? First, we can analyze the long-term environmental consequences. As we know, in order to prevent a massive explosion from occurring within the tankers, first responders were forced to release controlled amounts of gas into a nearby trench to burn the chemicals without resulting in human casualties. (Yan et al. 2023 ) This intentional release of the chemical resulted in hysteria surrounding the possibility of vinyl chloride entering nearby waterways, groundwater systems, and the air which can result in potential public health disasters. As mentioned previously, several areas throughout the Ohio River Basin had experienced surges in fish and macroinvertebrate deaths. Additionally, residents in the region have questioned the quality of their drinking water and have raised concerns regarding their overall water and air quality, many indicating respiratory irritation that coincides with leaving their house. Secondly, this event has unveiled many weaknesses that exist within the realm of environmental protection regulations, political and corporate entities, and government response to a disaster. It has become common thought that the derailment could have been prevented if stricter regulations were in place. Similarly, many citizens have called out to their public officials for the manner in which it has been managed and for the lack of assistance in the fallout of the Norfolk Southern train derailment.

Including the residents of East Palestine, Ohio, many American citizens would refer to the Norfolk Southern train derailment as a tragedy, an ecological travesty, or a complete and utter disaster. While I agree with these descriptions, I would offer one more term to complete the account of this event: fortunate. Now I know that depiction sounds inappropriate and harsh, so allow me to explain: the watershed concept portrays the interconnected nature of water across geographic landscapes as it travels from higher elevations to lower points on the Earth’s surface. With this in mind, it is important to be aware of the large watersheds throughout the United States as well as their hydrology. In this instance, we are focused on the Mississippi River Basin which includes tributaries and their watersheds such as the Ohio, Missouri, Arkansas, and Illinois Rivers. Considering that the area that was affected by the Norfolk Southern derailment resides within the Ohio River Basin, there was a possibility that the resulting pollution could have had an influence on the wider Mississippi River Basin as well as a number of people downstream of the incident. Currently, agricultural runoff is one of the country’s leading sources of water pollution (Lake Forest College 2022) and this is especially evident in the Mississippi River as it drains “all or part of 31 states and more than 1,245,000 square miles.” (EPA 2015) According to the EPA, “The Ohio (River) sub-basin has the highest percentage of streams affected by nutrients in the Mississippi River basin (55 percent of stream miles affected by nitrogen, and 43 percent affected by phosphorous).” (2015) Typically, fertilizers and pesticides are some of the leading contributors when observing increased levels of phosphorous and nitrogen in our waterways. In addition to agriculture, urban environments are another substantial source of nonpoint source pollution. The point is: the Ohio River Basin is a major source of pollution for the Mississippi River, and it was very possible that the East Palestine train derailment could have been much worse by travelling downstream and could have impacted the lives of many more civilians along the Mississippi River. A secondary point: there is an understated and underrecognized plague occurring in the nation’s waters as urban and agricultural runoff are responsible for introducing toxic nutrients to numerous waterways and can lead to eutrophication, resulting in dangerous algal blooms and fish kills in the Gulf of Mexico.

For those of you reading this from within the jurisdiction of the St. Joseph River Basin, this article may not directly resonate with you, however, the theme of compassion and appreciation toward our natural resources remains the same. It is important to remember the influence that upstream communities can have on those that live downstream as well as the unique patterns that water can travel. To provide more context to these concepts, allow me to highlight the intricate hydrology of the northern Indiana area. One of the most important locations for trade in the 1800s, South Bend, Indiana grew in popularity due to its location on a continental divide, which positioned the region within two entirely separate watersheds. (National Geographic 2022) Therefore, depending on where you are in the city, you may find yourself within the Mississippi River Basin or the St. Joseph River Basin, meaning that your stormwater can find its way to either the Gulf of Mexico or Lake Michigan! Anthropogenic influence on water resources often extends beyond the immediate area, including human influences on the Gulf of Mexico or the Mississippi River all the way from the Kankakee River in northern Indiana. This linkage creates an underemphasized connection between residents from different regions and requires all humans to treat their fellow humans, plants, animals, and resources with the utmost respect and consideration.

As observed in any disaster, chaos and catastrophe reveal true weakness and deficits that exist within a country, system, etc. For example, the worldwide phenomenon of the COVID-19 strained the resources of countless countries and was instrumental in emphasizing many of the flaws that exist within healthcare systems, research facilities, and the relationship between the public and their elected officials. Similarly, the Norfolk Southern train derailment revealed many of the same deficiencies, including the distrust that exists toward the government and science professionals as well as the overall disregard of the American environments as a result of the prioritization of profit over ecological health. This event should not have occurred if environmental protection would be held to a higher standard. This tragic derailment demonstrates a harmful precedent that may plague many parts of the world. In this instance, the consequences are potentially widespread as large amounts of soils and waters have become polluted, affecting many other parts of the country aside from that of this small Ohio town. The events of the East Palestine devastation mean much more than what has been reported thus far and expands much wider than that of Ohio and Pennsylvania. Knowledge of the watershed concept serves numerous ecological and sociological purposes by portraying the impacts of living upstream and downstream from other people and civilizations. 

Sources:
* https://abcnews.go.com/US/east-palestine-derailment-timeline-key-events-toxic-train/story?id=97522161
* https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/28/us/ohio-train-derailment-east-palestine.html
* https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/substances/vinyl-chloride
* https://ema.ohio.gov/media-publications/news/update-east-palestine-train-derailment-impact-wildlife-odnr 
* https://www.cnn.com/2023/02/23/us/ohio-train-derailment-east-palestine-thursday/index.html 
* https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/continental-divide/ 


